around her. ‘I have brought my work,’ said she in French,
displaying her bag and addressing all present. ‘Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me,’ she
added, turning to her hostess. ‘You wrote that it was to be
quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed.’
And she spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lacetrimmed, dainty gray dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just
below the breast.
‘Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than
anyone else,’ replied Anna Pavlovna.
‘You know,’ said the princess in the same tone of voice
and still in French, turning to a general, ‘my husband is deserting me? He is going to get himself killed. Tell me what
this wretched war is for?’ she added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she turned to speak to
his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
‘What a delightful woman this little princess is!’ said
Prince Vasili to Anna Pavlovna.
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young
man with close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored
breeches fashionable at that time, a very high ruffle, and a
brown dress coat. This stout young man was an illegitimate
son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known grandee of Catherine’s
time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man had
not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had
only just returned from abroad where he had been educated,
and this was his first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna
greeted him with the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of this lowest-grade 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 15
greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather
bigger than the other men in the room, her anxiety could
only have reference to the clever though shy, but observant
and natural, expression which distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
‘It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit
a poor invalid,’ said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed
glance with her aunt as she conducted him to her.
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as if in search of something. On his way to
the aunt he bowed to the little princess with a pleased smile,
as to an intimate acquaintance.
Anna Pavlovna’s alarm was justified, for Pierre turned
away from the aunt without waiting to hear her speech about
Her Majesty’s health. Anna Pavlovna in dismay detained
him with the words: ‘Do you know the Abbe Morio? He is a
most interesting man.’
‘Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and
it is very interesting but hardly feasible.’
‘You think so?’ rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say
something and get away to attend to her duties as hostess.
But Pierre now committed a reverse act of impoliteness.
First he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to
him, and now he continued to speak to another who wished
to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,
he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe’s plan
chimerical.
16 War and Peace
‘We will talk of it later,’ said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know
how to behave, she resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready to help at any point where the
conversation might happen to flag. As the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes round
and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to
check the machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her drawing room, approaching now a
silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on
him when he approached the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and again when he passed
to another group whose center was the abbe.
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at
Anna Pavlovna’s was the first he had attended in Russia.
He knew that all the intellectual lights of Petersburg were
gathered there and, like a child in a toyshop, did not know
which way to look, afraid of missing any clever conversation
that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident and refined
expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up
to Morio. Here the conversation seemed interesting and he
stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views,
as young people are fond of doing.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 17
Chapter III
Anna Pavlovna’s reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the
exception of the aunt, beside whom sat only one elderly lady,
who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place in
this brilliant society, the whole company had settled into
three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round
the abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the
beautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili’s daughter, and the
little Princess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though
rather too plump for her age. The third group was gathered
round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft
features and polished manners, who evidently considered
himself a celebrity but out of politeness modestly placed
himself at the disposal of the circle in which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a treat
to her guests. As a clever maitre d’hotel serves up as a specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had
seen it in the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests, first the vicomte and then the
abbe, as peculiarly choice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the murder of the
Duc d’Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d’Enghien
had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were 
18 War and Peace
particular reasons for Buonaparte’s hatred of him.
‘Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte,’ said Anna Pavlovna, with a pleasant feeling that there was something a la
Louis XV in the sound of that sentence: ‘Contez nous cela,
Vicomte.’
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of
his willingness to comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group
round him, inviting everyone to listen to his tale.
‘The vicomte knew the duc personally,’ whispered Anna
Pavlovna to of the guests. ‘The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur,’ said she to another. ‘How evidently he belongs to
the best society,’ said she to a third; and the vicomte was
served up to the company in the choicest and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a
hot dish.
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle
smile.
‘Come over here, Helene, dear,’ said Anna Pavlovna to
the beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off,
the center of another group.
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging
smile with which she had first entered the roomthe smile
of a perfectly beautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her
white dress trimmed with moss and ivy, with a gleam of
white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling diamonds, she
passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and
shapely shoulders, back, and bosomwhich in the fashion of 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 19
those days were very much exposedand she seemed to bring
the glamour of a ballroom with her as she moved toward
Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only did she
not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious
beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish
its effect.
‘How lovely!’ said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte
lifted his shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by
something extraordinary when she took her seat opposite
and beamed upon him also with her unchanging smile.
‘Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience,’
said he, smilingly inclining his head.
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table
and considered a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited.
All the time the story was being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm, altered in shape by its
pressure on the table, now at her still more beautiful bosom,
on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever
the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna,
at once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of
honor’s face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed
Helene.
‘Wait a moment, I’ll get my work.... Now then, what are
you thinking of?’ she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte.
‘Fetch me my workbag.’
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling 
and talking merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily
arranged herself in her seat.
‘Now I am all right,’ she said, and asking the vicomte to
begin, she took up her work.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined
the circle and moving a chair close to hers seated himself
beside her.
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by
the fact that in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his sister’s, but while in
her case everything was lit up by a joyous, self-satisfied,
youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His
eyes, nose, and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant,
wearied grimace, and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
‘It’s not going to be a ghost story?’ said he, sitting down
beside the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if
without this instrument he could not begin to speak.
‘Why no, my dear fellow,’ said the astonished narrator,
shrugging his shoulders.
‘Because I hate ghost stories,’ said Prince Hippolyte in a
tone which showed that he only understood the meaning of
his words after he had uttered them.
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers
could not be sure whether what he said was very witty or 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 21
very stupid. He was dressed in a dark-green dress coat, knee
breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he
called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote,
then current, to the effect that the Duc d’Enghien had gone
secretly to Paris to visit Mademoiselle George; that at her
house he came upon Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress’ favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was
subject, and was thus at the duc’s mercy. The latter spared
him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid
by death.
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at
the point where the rivals suddenly recognized one another;
and the ladies looked agitated.
‘Charming!’ said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring
glance at the little princess.
‘Charming!’ whispered the little princess, sticking the
needle into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from going on with it.
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling
gratefully prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a watchful eye on the young man who so
alarmed her, noticed that he was talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the rescue. Pierre
had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about the
balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the
young man’s simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his
pet theory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and 
too naturally, which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved.
‘The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the
rights of the people,’ the abbe was saying. ‘It is only necessary for one powerful nation like Russiabarbaric as she is
said to beto place herself disinterestedly at the head of an
alliance having for its object the maintenance of the balance
of power of Europe, and it would save the world!’
‘But how are you to get that balance?’ Pierre was beginning.
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking
severely at Pierre, asked the Italian how he stood Russian
climate. The Italian’s face instantly changed and assumed
an offensively affected, sugary expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
‘I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the society, more especially of the feminine society,
in which I have had the honor of being received, that I have
not yet had time to think of the climate,’ said he.
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna,
the more conveniently to keep them under observation,
brought them into the larger circle